01_What_is_Stats/day2.md, before:

---------------- Table of Contents ---------------- 

1. [How Does Statistics Work?](#howwork)
2. [Description](#describe)
3. [Comparison](#compare)
4. [Relation](#relate)
5. [Fun Things Stats Has Done](#fun)

---------------- Table of Contents ---------------- 

## <a id="howwork"></a>How Does Statistics Work?
So you may ask yourself, "How does statistics even work?" And this is a good question, a question that this class is all about. Last semester, the students told me that it would've helped if we had an example of how and why statistics works the way that it does. 

This graphic gives you an overview, but let's think about it a bit more.

![The Process](/images/process.png)

## <a id="howwork"></a>Describe
Descriptives essentially take pieces of data and refine it in such a way as to turn it into information we can use. We tend to begin with a number of measures sometimes referred to as summary stats or modes of central tendency: (mean, median, range, and standard deviation). 

Mean is the average, median is the middle most point, range is lowest to highest value, and standard deviation describes how much variance is within the set of data. Think of it sort of like a weather person talking about average temperatures, what the high and low will be, how today differed from yesterday but also the same day last year. 

While these data are useful, folks will tend to react to raw values in different ways. As such, there are also ways to show these values graphically by using things like Boxplots, histograms, pie charts, Pareto charts, and many others. One last way to think about these descriptives or summary stats is that they show us what sort of distribution we have (i.e., Poisson, binomial, normal). In the end, we cannot really make inferences from here, not actual ones anyway. We can make useful guesses as to trends, but we need more methods to take us from description to inference. 

## <a id="compare"></a> Comparison
Outside of description, we can actually take measurements before and after something happens. As students, you do this all the time but probably don't know it. We teachers will present a lecture and then we test you to understand where you're at. The next year, we will adjust what and how we teach and then provide the same test again. We then compare these two numbers and see which is better. Given this information, we then adjust for the semester *after* that and repeat it all again. This sort of experimentation also happens to you, to all of us, all the time. 

For example, the lights on Dodge were recently re-timed after an extensive study. They looked for weight plate sensititivity as well as the average speed needed to comfortably drive down the road without stopping for each light. After this study, they adjusted using the data analysis they performed and now they are gathering those same data to see if there is a difference. 

## <a id="relate"></a> Relation
This is perhaps the most relevant aspect of stats in the present in that we can look at how things are correlated or how one thing can predict another (correlation, regression, and chi-square). Another thing to think about here is related is that we can also look at how things can predictibly vary (ANOVA). This last one is not so much relation but variance and variance is how something can relate (if that makes sense, fantastic! If not, that's ok. It's on me.).

To be brief, we can say that this type of stats can be put into two large categories: historical analysis and experiments. With history, we gather data and it just sits in a dataset. In fact, all data sets are historical since all data is collected at a point in the past (from minutes to centuries). What we ask in history is stuff like how things correlate. For example: Is there a correlation between climate change and carbon dioxide?” 

When we move into "prediction" then we can say that "How much does age predict political affiliation?" We use experiments quite often with regression but unlike an experiment looking at before and after, these data are constant and finnicky. It takes quite a bit to make it all make sense. Another way to say this is that regression experiments are passive. We might see how income, parents income, and education level predict political outlook but we have to leave the model open and able to be changed as we see new data and how it changes over time. 

We will get more into this as we continue class. Some of what we'll cover contradicts this stuff but overall, these 3 buckets make sense.

## <a id="fun"></a>Fun Things Stats Has Done
* The average drunk driver drives under the influence more than 80 times before being arrested the first time.
* One-third of adults still sleep with a comfort object.
* The global rate for washing hands after using the toilet is under 20 percent.
* Americans read for personal interest for 10 minutes or less per day.
* More than 36 million U.S. adults cannot read above a third grade level.
* And more than half a million people in America experience homelessness a night.
* Nearly a quarter of rural Americans say access to high-speed internet is a "major problem" in their community.
* On an average day, only 19 percent of American men do housework—as compared to 49 percent of American women.
*   Each 5 m.p.h. you drive over 60 m.p.h. is like paying an additional $.10 a gallon for gas.
* Jumbo jets use 4,000 gallons of fuel to take off.
* 93% of all people will verify things they see online (or in class).
* If the oldest living person is 115 years old, then 116 years ago there was a totally different set of humans on earth.
* 95% of the ocean and 99% of the oceans floor remains unexplored
* The average person in Canada has a higher net worth than the average person in the USA. The median income for Canadians is about twice the median income for Americans.

Commit message:

And so week 1 is up.

01_What_is_Stats/day2.md, after:

In this class, I will be summarizing your textbook and condensing it into what I hope are bite-sized pieces. The way it should work is that we will have: 

1. A Github Entry on each day of each week.
2. A powerpoint presentation that bridges the book, class, and entries
3. A quiz, an analysis, or a test.

And so, this is the introduction of those things. We won't really have a powerpoint this week, but i'll make one with basic words for those of you who use them for notes.

---------------- Table of Contents ---------------- 

1. [How Does Statistics Work?](#howwork)
2. [Description](#describe)
3. [Comparison](#compare)
4. [Relation](#relate)
5. [Fun Things Stats Has Done](#fun)

---------------- Table of Contents ---------------- 

## <a id="howwork"></a>How Does Statistics Work?
So you may ask yourself, "How does statistics even work?" And this is a good question, a question that this class is all about. Last semester, the students told me that it would've helped if we had an example of how and why statistics works the way that it does. 

This graphic gives you an overview, but let's think about it a bit more.

![The Process](/images/process.png)

## <a id="howwork"></a>Describe
Descriptives essentially take pieces of data and refine it in such a way as to turn it into information we can use. We tend to begin with a number of measures sometimes referred to as summary stats or modes of central tendency: (mean, median, range, and standard deviation). 

Mean is the average, median is the middle most point, range is lowest to highest value, and standard deviation describes how much variance is within the set of data. Think of it sort of like a weather person talking about average temperatures, what the high and low will be, how today differed from yesterday but also the same day last year. 

While these data are useful, folks will tend to react to raw values in different ways. As such, there are also ways to show these values graphically by using things like Boxplots, histograms, pie charts, Pareto charts, and many others. One last way to think about these descriptives or summary stats is that they show us what sort of distribution we have (i.e., Poisson, binomial, normal). In the end, we cannot really make inferences from here, not actual ones anyway. We can make useful guesses as to trends, but we need more methods to take us from description to inference. 

## <a id="compare"></a> Comparison
Outside of description, we can actually take measurements before and after something happens. As students, you do this all the time but probably don't know it. We teachers will present a lecture and then we test you to understand where you're at. The next year, we will adjust what and how we teach and then provide the same test again. We then compare these two numbers and see which is better. Given this information, we then adjust for the semester *after* that and repeat it all again. This sort of experimentation also happens to you, to all of us, all the time. 

For example, the lights on Dodge were recently re-timed after an extensive study. They looked for weight plate sensititivity as well as the average speed needed to comfortably drive down the road without stopping for each light. After this study, they adjusted using the data analysis they performed and now they are gathering those same data to see if there is a difference. 

## <a id="relate"></a> Relation
This is perhaps the most relevant aspect of stats in the present in that we can look at how things are correlated or how one thing can predict another (correlation, regression, and chi-square). Another thing to think about here is related is that we can also look at how things can predictibly vary (ANOVA). This last one is not so much relation but variance and variance is how something can relate (if that makes sense, fantastic! If not, that's ok. It's on me.).

To be brief, we can say that this type of stats can be put into two large categories: historical analysis and experiments. With history, we gather data and it just sits in a dataset. In fact, all data sets are historical since all data is collected at a point in the past (from minutes to centuries). What we ask in history is stuff like how things correlate. For example: Is there a correlation between climate change and carbon dioxide?” 

When we move into "prediction" then we can say that "How much does age predict political affiliation?" We use experiments quite often with regression but unlike an experiment looking at before and after, these data are constant and finnicky. It takes quite a bit to make it all make sense. Another way to say this is that regression experiments are passive. We might see how income, parents income, and education level predict political outlook but we have to leave the model open and able to be changed as we see new data and how it changes over time. 

We will get more into this as we continue class. Some of what we'll cover contradicts this stuff but overall, these 3 buckets make sense.

## <a id="fun"></a>Fun Things Stats Has Done
* The average drunk driver drives under the influence more than 80 times before being arrested the first time.
* One-third of adults still sleep with a comfort object.
* The global rate for washing hands after using the toilet is under 20 percent.
* Americans read for personal interest for 10 minutes or less per day.
* More than 36 million U.S. adults cannot read above a third grade level.
* And more than half a million people in America experience homelessness a night.
* Nearly a quarter of rural Americans say access to high-speed internet is a "major problem" in their community.
* On an average day, only 19 percent of American men do housework—as compared to 49 percent of American women.
*   Each 5 m.p.h. you drive over 60 m.p.h. is like paying an additional $.10 a gallon for gas.
* Jumbo jets use 4,000 gallons of fuel to take off.
* 93% of all people will verify things they see online (or in class).
* If the oldest living person is 115 years old, then 116 years ago there was a totally different set of humans on earth.
* 95% of the ocean and 99% of the oceans floor remains unexplored
* The average person in Canada has a higher net worth than the average person in the USA. The median income for Canadians is about twice the median income for Americans.
